<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
			<p>It was noon of that day when Katharine Howard set out again from Richmond to ride back to Hampton Court; and at noon of that day Throckmorton’s barge shot dangerously beneath London Bridge, hastening to Hampton Court. At noon Thomas Culpepper passed over London Bridge, because a great crowd pressed across it from the south going to see a burning at Smithfield; at noon, too, or five minutes later, the young Poins galloped furiously past the end of the bridge and did not cross over, but sped through Southwark towards Hampton Court. And at noon or thereabouts the King, dressed in green as a husbandman, sat on a log to await a gunfire, in the forest that was near to Richmond river path opposite Isleworth. He had given to Katharine a paper that she was to deliver to the master gunner of Richmond Palace in case the Queen Anne did satisfy her that the marriage was no marriage. So that, when among the green glades where the great trees let down their branches near the sward and shewed little tips of tender green leaves, he heard three thuds come echoing, he sprang to his feet, and, smiting his great, green-clothed thigh, he cried out: “Ha! I be young again!” He pulled to his lips the mouth of the English horn that was girdled across his shoulder and under his arm; he set his feet wide apart, filled his lungs with air, and blew a thin, clear call. At once there issued from brakes, thickets and glades the figures of men, dressed like the King in yeoman’s green, bearing bows over their shoulders, horns at their elbows, or having straining dogs in their leashes.</p>
			<p>“Ho!” the King said to his chief verderer, a man of sixty with a grey beard, but so that all others could hear; “be it well understood that I will have you shew some ladies what make of thing it is to rule over jolly Englishmen.” He directed them how he would have them drive the deer at the end of the glade; he saw to the setting up of white wands of peeled willows and, taking from his yeoman-companion, that was the Earl of Surrey, his great bow, he shot a mighty shaft along the glade, to shew how far away he would have the deer to pass like swift ghosts between the aisles of the trees.</p>
			<p>But the palace of Hampton lay deserted and given up to scullions, who lay in the sunlight and took their rare ease. For a great many lords that could shoot well with the bow were gone to play the yeoman with the King; and a great many that had sumptuous and gallant apparel were gone to join the ladies riding back from Richmond; and the King’s whole council, together with many lords that were awful or reverend in their appearance, were gone to sit in the scaffold to see the burning of the friar that had denied the King’s supremacy of the Church and the burnings of the six Protestants that had denied the presence of Christ’s body in the Sacrament. Only Privy Seal, who had ordered these things, was still walking in his gallery where he so often had walked of late.</p>
			<p>He had with him Wriothesley, whose face was utterly downcast and abashed; he walked turning more swiftly than had been his wont ever before. Wriothesley hung down his great bearded, honest head and sighed three times.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” he said at last, “I see before us nothing but that ye make to divorce the Queen Anne.” And the words seemed to come from him as if they cost him his heart’s blood.</p>
			<p>Cromwell paused before him, his hands behind his back, his feet apart.</p>
			<p>“The weighty question,” he said, “is this: Who hath betrayed me: of Udal; of the alewife that he should have had the papers of; or Throckmorton?”</p>
			<p>He had that morning received from Cleves, in the letter of his agent there, the certain proof that the Duke had written to the Emperor Charles making an utter submission to save his land from ruin, and as utterly abjuring his alliance with the King his brother-in-law and with the Schmalkaldner league and its Protestant princes. Cromwell had immediately called to him Wriothesley that was that day ordering the horses to take him back to Paris town. He had given him this news, which, if it were secret then, must in a month be made known to all the world. To Wriothesley the Protestant this blow was the falling in of the world; here was Protestantism at an end and dead. There remained nothing but to save the necks of some to carry on the faith to distant days. Therefore he had brought out his reluctant words to urge Privy Seal to the divorce of Anne of Cleves. There was no other way; there was no other issue. Privy Seal must abjure Cleves’ Queen, and the very savour of a desire for a Protestant league.</p>
			<p>But for Privy Seal the problem was not what to do, a thing he might settle in a minute’s swift thought, but the discovery of who had betrayed him⁠—for his whole life had been given to bringing together his machine of service. You might determine an alliance or a divorce between breath and breath; but the training of your instruments, the weeding out of them that had flaws in their fidelities; the exhibiting of a swift and awful vengeance upon mutineers⁠—these were the things that called for thinking and long furrowing of brows. He considered of this point whilst Wriothesley spoke long and earnestly.</p>
			<p>It was expedient before all things that Privy Seal keep the helm of the State; it was very certain that the King should not long keep to his marriage with the lady from Cleves; lamentable it was that Cleves had fallen away from Protestantism and from the league that so goodly had promised for truth in religion. But so, alas that the day had come! so it was. The King was a man brave and royal in his degree, but unstable, so that to keep him to Protestantism and good government a firm man was earnestly needed. There was none other man than Privy Seal. Let him consider earnestly that if it tasted ill with his conscience to move this divorce, yet elsewise such great ills should strike the kingdom, that far better it were to deaden his conscience than to sacrifice for a queen of doubtful faith the best hope that they had then, all of them, in the world. He spoke for many minutes in this strain, for twice the clock struck the half-hour from the tower above the gallery.</p>
			<p>Finally, long-bearded, solemn, and richly attired as he was, Wriothesley went down upon one knee, and, laying his bonnet on the ground, stretched out a long hand.</p>
			<p>“My lord,” he said, “I do beseech you that you stay with us and succour us. We are a small band, but zealous and well-caparisoned. Bethink you that you put this land in peril if by maintaining this Queen ye do endanger your precious neck. For I were loath to take arms against the King’s Majesty, and we are loyal and faithful subjects all; yet sooner than ye should fall⁠—”</p>
			<p>Cromwell stood over him, looking at him dispassionately, his hands still behind his back.</p>
			<p>“Well, it is a great matter,” he uttered elusively. He moved as if to walk off, then suddenly turned upon his heel again. “Ye do me more ill by speaking in that guise than ever Cleves or Gardiner or all my enemies have done. For assuredly if rumours of your words should reach the King when he was ill-affected, it should go hardly with me.”</p>
			<p>He paused, and then spoke gently.</p>
			<p>“And assuredly ye do me more wrong than ill,” he said. “For this I swear to you, ye have heard evil enow of me to have believed some. But there is no man dare call me traitor in his heart of them that do know me. And this I tell you: I had rather die a thousand deaths than that ye should prop me up against the majesty and awe of government. By so doing ye might, at a hazard, save my life, but for certain ye would imperil that for which I have given my life.”</p>
			<p>Again he paused and paced, and again came back in his traces to where Wriothesley knelt.</p>
			<p>“Some danger there is for me,” he said, “but I think it a very little one. The King knoweth too well how good a servant and how profitable I have been to him. I do think he will not cast me away to please a woman. Yet this is a very notable woman⁠—ye wot of whom I speak; but I hope very soon to have one to my hand that shall utterly cast down and soil her in the eyes of the King’s Highness.”</p>
			<p>“Ye do think her unchaste?” Wriothesley asked. “I have heard you say⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Knight,” Cromwell answered; “what I think will not be revealed today nor tomorrow, but only at the Day of Judgment. Nevertheless, so do I love my master’s cause that⁠—if it peril mine own upon that awful occasion⁠—I so will strive to tear this woman down.”</p>
			<p>Wriothesley rose, stiff and angular.</p>
			<p>“God keep the issue!” he said.</p>
			<p>“Why, get you gone,” Cromwell said. “But this I pray you gently: that ye restrain your fellows’ tongues from speaking treason and heresy. Three of your friends, as you know, I must burn this day for such speakings; you, too⁠—you yourself, too⁠—I must burn if it come to that pass, or you shall die by the block. For I will have this land purged.” His cold eyes flamed dangerously for a minute. “Fool!” he thundered, “I will have this land purged of treasons and schisms. Get you gone before I advise further with myself of your haughty and stiff-necked speeches. For learn this: that before all creeds, and before all desires, and before all women, and before all men, standeth the good of this commonwealth, and state, and King, whose servant I be. Get you gone and report my words ere I come terribly among ye.”</p>
			<p>Making his desultory pacings from end to end of the gallery, Cromwell considered that in that speech he had done a good morning’s work, for assuredly these men put him in peril. More than one of these dangerous proclaimings of loyalty to him rather than to the King had come to his ears. They must be put an end to.</p>
			<p>But this issue faded from his mind. Left to himself, he let his hands twitch as feverishly as they would. Cleves and its Duke had played him false! His sheet anchor was gone! There remained only, then, the device of proving to the King that Katharine Howard was a monster of unchastity. For so strong was the witness that he had gathered against her that he could not but try his Fate once more⁠—to give the King, as so often he had done, proof of how diligently his minister fended for him and how requisite he was, as a man who had eyes in every corner of this realm.</p>
			<p>To do that it was necessary that he should find her cousin; he had all the others under lock and key already in that palace. But her cousin⁠—he must come soon or he would come too late!</p>
			<p>Privy Seal was a man of immense labours, that carried him to burning his lamp into hours when all other men in land slept in their beds. And, at that date, he had a many letters to indite, because the choosing of burgesses for the Parliament was going forward, and he had ado in some burghs to make the citizens choose the men that he bade them have. He gave to each shire and burgh long thought and minute commands. He knew the mayor of each town, and had notebooks telling him the opinions and deeds of every man that had freedom to elect all over England. And into each man he had instilled the terror of his vengeance. This needed anxious labours, and it was the measure of his concern that he stayed now from this work to meditate a full ten minutes upon this matter of bringing Thomas Culpepper before the King.</p>
			<p>Thus, when, after he had for many hours been busy with his papers, Lascelles, the gentleman informer of the Archbishop’s, came to tell him that he had seen Thomas Culpepper at Greenwich that dawn and had followed him to the burning at Smithfield, whence he had hastened to Hampton, the Lord Privy Seal took from his neck his own golden collar of knighthood and cast it over Lascelles’ neck. In part this was because he had never before been so glad in his life, and in part because it was his policy to reward very richly them that did him a chance service.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” he said, “I grudge that ye be the Archbishop’s man and not mine, so your judgment jumps with mine.”</p>
			<p>And indeed Lascelles’ judgment had jumped with Privy Seal’s. He was the Archbishop’s confidential gentleman; he swayed in many things the Archbishop’s judgments. Yet in this one thing Cranmer had been too afraid to jump with him.</p>
			<p>“To me,” Lascelles said, “it appeared that the sole thing to be done was to strike at the esteem of the King for Kat Howard, and the sole method to strike at her was through her dealings with her cousin.”</p>
			<p>“Sir,” Cromwell interrupted him, “in this ye have hit upon mine own secret judgment that I had told to no man save my private servants.”</p>
			<p>Lascelles bent his knee to acknowledge this great praise.</p>
			<p>“Very gracious lord,” he said, “his Grace of Canterbury opines rather that this woman must be propitiated. He hath sent her books to please her tickle fancy of erudition; he hath sent her Latin chronicles and Saxon to prove to her, if he may, that the English priesthood is older than that of Rome. He is minded to convince her if he may, or, if he may not, he plans to make submission to her, to commend her learning and in all things to flatter her⁠—for she is very approachable by these channels, more than by any other.”</p>
			<p>In short, as Lascelles made it appear to Cromwell’s attentive brain, the Archbishop was, as always, anxious to run with the hare and hunt with the hounds. He was a schismatic bishop, appointed by the King and the King’s creature, not the Bishop of Rome’s. So that if with his high pen and his great gift of penning weighty sentences, he might bring Kat Howard to acknowledging him bishop and archbishop, he was ready so to do. If he must make submission to her judgment, he was ready so to do.</p>
			<p>“Yet,” Lascelles concluded, “I have urged him against these courses; or yet not against these courses, but to this other end in any case.” For it was certain that Kat Howard would have no truck with Cranmer. She would make him go on his knees to Rome and then she would burn him; or if she did not burn him she would make him end his days with a hair shirt in the cell of an anchorite. “I hold it manifested,” Lascelles said, “that this lady is such an one as will listen to no reason nor policy, neither will she palter, for whatever device, with them that have not lifelong paid lip-service to the arch-devil whose seat is in Rome.”</p>
			<p>Cromwell nodded his head once more to commend the Archbishop’s gentleman with a perfect acquiescence.</p>
			<p>It had chanced that that morning Lascelles had gone to Greenwich to fetch for the Archbishop some books and tractates. The Archbishop was minded to lend them to the Bishop Hugh Latimer of Worcester; that day he was to dispute publicly with the friar Forest that was cast to be burned. And, coming to Greenwich, still thinking much upon Katharine Howard and her cousin, at the dawn, Lascelles had seen the tall, drunken, red-bearded man in green, with his squat, broad gossip in grey, come staggering up from the ship at the public quay.</p>
			<p>“I did leave my burden of books,” he said; “for what be Bishop Hugh Latimer’s arguments from a pulpit to a burning priest to the pulling down of this woman?” He had dogged Thomas Culpepper and his crony; he had seen him burst open windows, cast meat about in the mud and feed the populace of the Greenwich hamlet.</p>
			<p>“And for sure,” he said, “if the King’s Highness should see this man’s filthiness and foul demeanour, he will not be fain to feed after such a make of hound.”</p>
			<p>Coming to Smithfield, where Culpepper stayed to cheer on the business, Lascelles had very swiftly begged the Archbishop, where, behind Hugh Larimer’s pulpit, he sat to see Friar Forest corrected⁠—had very swiftly begged the Archbishop to give him leave to come to Hampton.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” Lascelles said, “with a great sigh he gave me leave; for much he fears to have a hand in this matter.”</p>
			<p>“Why, he shall have no hand,” Cromwell said. He clapped his hands, and told the blonde pageboy that appeared to send him very quickly Viridus, that had had this matter in his care.</p>
			<p>Lascelles recounted shortly how he had set four men to watch Thomas Culpepper till he came to Hampton, and very swiftly to send word of when he came. Then the spy dropped his voice and pulled out a parchment from his bosom.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” he said, “whilst Culpepper was in the palace of Greenwich I made haste to go on board the ship that had brought him from Calais, being minded if I could to discover what was discoverable concerning his coming.”</p>
			<p>He dropped his voice still further.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” he began again, “there be those in this realm, and maybe very close to your own person, that would have stayed his coming. For upon that ship lay a boy, sore sick of the sea and very beaten, by name Harry Poins. Wherefore, or at whose commands, he had done this I had no occasion to discover, since he lay like a sick dog and might not see nor hear nor speak; but this it was told me he had done: in every way he sought to let and hinder <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.</abbr> Culpepper’s coming to England with so marked an importunity that at last Culpepper did set his crony to beat this boy.” He paused again. “And this too I discovered, taking it from the boy’s person, for in my avocations and service to his Grace, whom God preserve and honour! I have much practised these abstractions.”</p>
			<p>Lascelles held the parchment, from which fell a seal like a drop of blood.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” he said, “this agreement is sealed with your own seal; it is from one Throckmorton in your service. It maketh this <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.</abbr> Culpepper lieutenant of barges and lighters in the town and port of Calais. It enjoineth upon him to stay diligently there and zealously to persevere in these duties.”</p>
			<p>Cromwell neither started nor moved; he stood looking down at the floor for a minute space; then he held out his hand for the parchment, considered the seal and the subscription, let his eyes course over the lines of Throckmorton’s handwriting that made a black patch on the surface soiled with seawater and sweat, and uttered composedly:</p>
			<p>“Why, it is well; it is monstrous well that you have saved this parchment from coming to evil hands.”</p>
			<p>He rolled it neatly, placed it in his belt, and four times stamped his foot on the floor.</p>
			<p>There came in at this signal, Viridus, the one of his secretaries that had first instructed Katharine Howard as to her demeanour. Since then, he had had among his duties the watching over Thomas Culpepper. Calm, furtive, with his thin hands clasped before him, the Sieur Viridus answered the swift, hard questions of his master. He was more attached and did more services to the Chancellor of the Augmentations, whom he kept mostly mindful of such farms and fields as Privy Seal intended should be given to benefit his particular friends and servants; for he had a mind that would hold many details of figures and directions.</p>
			<p>Thus, he had sent two men to Calais and the road Paris-ward with injunctions to meet Thomas Culpepper and tell him tales of Katharine Howard’s lewdness in the King’s Court; to tell him, too, that the farms in Kent, promised him as a guerdon for ridding Paris of the Cardinal Pole, were deeded and signed to him, but that evil men sought to have them away.</p>
			<p>“Ye sent no boy to stay him at Calais with lieutenancy of barges?” Cromwell asked, swiftly and hard in voice.</p>
			<p>“No boy ne no man,” Viridus answered.</p>
			<p>He had acted by the card of Privy Seal’s injunctions; men were posted at Calais, at Dover, at Ashford, at Maidstone, at Sandwich, at Rochester, at Greenwich, at all the landing places of London. Each several one was instructed to tell Thomas Culpepper some new story that, if Culpepper were not already hastening to Hampton, should make him mend his paces. If he were hastening to Hampton they were to leave him be. All these things were done as Privy Seal had directed.</p>
			<p>“What witnesses have ye here from Lincolnshire?” Cromwell asked.</p>
			<p>In his monotonous singsong Viridus named these people: Under lock and key in the King’s cellary house, five from Stamford that had heard Culpepper swear Kat Howard was his leman⁠—these had really heard this thing, and called for no priming; under instruction in the Well Ward gate chamber, four that should swear a certain boy was her child⁠—these needed to have their tales evened as to the night the child was born, and how it had been brought from the Lord Edmund’s house wrapped in a napkin. In his own pantry, Viridus had three under guard and admonition of his own⁠—these should swear that whenas they served the Lord Edmund they had seen at several times Culpepper with her in thickets, or climbing to her window in the night, or at dawn coming away from her chamber door. These needed to be instructed as to all these things.</p>
			<p>Cromwell listened with little nods, marking each item of these instructions.</p>
			<p>“Listen now to me,” he said; “give attentive ear.” Viridus dropped his eyes to the floor, as one who lends all his faculties to be subservient to his hearing. “At six or thereabouts <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.</abbr> Culpepper shall reach this Court. Ye shall have men ready to bring him straightway to thee. At seven or thereabouts shall come the Lady Katharine to her room; with her shall come the King’s Highness, habited as a yeoman. Be attentive. Next Katharine Howard’s door is the door of the Lady Deedes. Her I have this day sent to other quarters. Having <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.</abbr> Culpepper with you, you shall go to this room of the Lady Deedes. You shall sit at the table with the door a little opened, so that ye may see when the King’s Highness cometh. But you shall sit opposite <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.</abbr> Culpepper that he may not see.” Viridus remained like a statue carved of wood, motionless, his head inclined to the ground. Lascelles had his head forward, his mouth a little open. “Whilst you wait you shall have with you the deeds giving to <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.</abbr> Culpepper his farms in Kent. These ye shall display to him. Ye shall dilate upon the goodness of the fields, upon the commodity in barns and oasthouses, upon the sweetness of the water wells, upon the goodliness of the air. But when the King shall be entered into the Lady Katharine’s room you shall give <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.</abbr> Culpepper to drink of a certain flagon of wine that I shall give to you. When he hath drunk you shall begin to hint that all is ill with the lady he would wed; as thus you shall say: ‘Aye, your nest is well lined, but how of the bird?’ And you shall talk of her having consorted much with a large yeoman. And when you shall observe him to be much heated with the subtle drug and your hintings, you shall say to him, ‘Lo, next this door is the door of the Lady Katharine. Go see if perchance she have not even now this yeoman with her.’ ”</p>
			<p>Viridus nodded his head once up and down; Lascelles clapped his hands twice for joy at this contrivance. Cromwell added further injunctions: that Viridus should have in the corner of the gallery a man that should come hastening to him, the Lord Privy Seal, where he walked in the gallery; another who, at his own signal, should hastily bring the witnesses prepared against Kat Howard; another who should bring the engrossment of a command to behead <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.</abbr> Culpepper that night in the King’s Tower House, and yet another who should bring up guards and captains. All these, in their separate companies, should be set in the great room abovestairs next the King’s chapel, so that they might swiftly and without hindrance or accident come down the little stair to the Lady Katharine’s room. Again Viridus once bowed his head, moving his lips the while repeating these commands in words as they were uttered.</p>
			<p>Cromwell paused again to think, then he added:</p>
			<p>“I will set this gentleman, Lascelles, to bring <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.</abbr> Culpepper to you. And because I will make very certain that this man shall not touch the person of the King, I will have this gentleman to stay with you in the room where you be, to follow with you <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.</abbr> Culpepper into the Lady Katharine’s room. He shall run with you betwixt <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.</abbr> Culpepper and the King; but if <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">T.</abbr> Culpepper be minded to fall upon the Lady Katharine, ye shall not either of you stay him. It were best if he might stab her dead. Doubtless he shall.”</p>
			<p>“Before God!” Lascelles cried out, “would I were a king to have so masterful and devising a minister as Privy Seal!”</p>
			<p>“Get you gone,” Privy Seal said to Viridus. “I ha’ no need to tell you that if ye do faithfully and to a good issue carry out this play, you shall be greatly rewarded so that few shall hold their heads higher than you in the land. Ye know how I befriend my friends. But know too this: that if this scheme miscarry, either of your fault or another’s, either through inattention or ill chance, either through treason or dullness of the brain of man, down to the least pin of it, ye shall not this night sleep in your bed, nor ever more shall you be seen in daylight above the earth.” He pointed suddenly from the window to the low sun. “Have a care that ye so act as ye shall see that disc again!”</p>
			<p>Viridus spoke no word, but having waited a minute to hear if Privy Seal had more to enjoin, noiselessly and with his hands folded before him as they had been when he came, moved away over the shining floor. He went to tell the old, shivering Chancellor of the Augmentations that he must absent himself upon their common master’s errands. “I misdoubt some heads will fall tonight,” he added as he went; “our lord’s nose for treasons is sharpened again.” And that creature of Privy Seal’s shook beneath the furs that he wore, though it was already April; for the Chancellor had his private reasons to dread Privy Seal’s outbursts of suspicion.</p>
			<p>In the gallery, Privy Seal still spoke earnestly with Lascelles.</p>
			<p>“I give this part of honour and privilege to thee,” he said; “for though I was well prepared in all things, I trow I may trust thee better than another person.”</p>
			<p>Lascelles was to watch for Culpepper, to hasten to Viridus, to attend upon the pair of them as the pilot-fish attendeth upon the ghostly and silent shark, not to leave them till the work was accomplished, or, upon the least sign of treason in Viridus or another, to come hastening as never man hastened, to Privy Seal.</p>
			<p>“For,” Cromwell ended, “ye have felt like me how, if this realm is to be saved, saved it shall be by this thing alone.”</p>
			<p>Lascelles, who had had no opening to speak, opened now his lips. Great ferreter as he was, he had discovered former servants of the Duchess of Norfolk, that were ready, for consideration of threats, to swear that they had seen the Lady Katharine when a child in her grandmother’s house to be over familiar with one Francis Dearham. He himself had these witnesses earmarked and attainable, and he was upon the point of offering them to Privy Seal. But he recollected that Privy Seal had witnesses enow of his own. Tomorrow was also a day; and the King, if he would not now listen to tales against Kat Howard, might be brought to give ear to those and others added in a year’s time, or when he began to tire of his woman as all men tire of women. Therefore he once more closed his lips. And Cromwell spoke as if his thoughts of a truth jumped together with Lascelles’.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” he said, “I would willingly bribe you from the service of his Grace of Canterbury to come into mine. But it may be that I shall not long outlive these days. Therefore I enjoin upon you these things: Serve well your master; guide him, for he needeth guidance, subtly as today ye would have guided him. I will not take you from him for this cause, that there is little need in one house of two that think alike. One sufficeth. For two houses with like minds are stronger than one that is bicephalous. Therefore serve you well Cranmer as in my day I served well the great Cardinal; so at his death, even as I at Wolsey’s, ye may rise very high.”</p>
			<p>He went swiftly into his little cabinet, and returning, had in his hand a little book.</p>
			<p>“Read well in this,” he said, “where much I have read. You shall see in it mine own annotations. This is ‘<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Il Principe</i>’ of Macchiavelli; there is none other book like it in the world. Study of it well: read it upon your walks. I am a simple man, yet hath it made me.”</p>
			<p>Shadows were falling into the gallery, for the descending sun had come behind the dark, tall elms beyond the river.</p>
			<p>“Upon my faith,” Cromwell said, “and as I hope to enter into Paradise by the aid of Christ the King that commended faithful servants, I tell you I had great joy when you told me this woman’s cousin had come into these parts. But greater joy than any were mine could I discern in this land a disciple that could carry on my work. As yet I have seen none; yet ponder well upon this book. God may work in thee, as in me, great changes by its study.⁠ ⁠… Get you gone.”</p>
			<p>He continued long to pace the gallery, his hands behind his back, his cap pulled over his narrow eyes; it grew dusk so that his figure could scarce be seen where it was at the further end. He looked from the casement up into the moon, small and tenuous in the pale western skies. He had been going over in his mind the details of how he had commanded Culpepper to be brought before the King. And at the last when he considered again that Culpepper might well strike his cousin dead at his feet, and that then she would have no tongue to stand against calumnies withal, he uttered the words:</p>
			<p>“I think I hold them.”</p>
			<p>And, pondering upon the wonderful destiny that had brought him up from a trooper in Italy to these high places, he saluted the moon with his crooked forefinger⁠—for the moon was the president at his birth.</p>
			<p>“Why,” he uttered aloud, “I have survived four queens’ days.”</p>
			<p>For Katharine of Aragon he had seen die; and Anne Boleyn had died on the scaffold; and Jane Seymour was dead in childbed; and now, with the news from Cleves, Anne’s reign was over and done with.</p>
			<p>“Four queens,” he repeated.</p>
			<p>And, turning swiftly to the door, he commanded that Throckmorton be sent him at once when he came to the archway.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
